docs/_Experimental-SOPs/metabolite-extraction-from-plant-tissue.md, before:

---
title: Metabolite extraction from plant tissue
category: Experimental-SOPs
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
authors:
---


Protocol/MCF/SamplePrep/03: Metabolite extraction from plant tissues {% cite Novák_2016 %}

## Sample required
Plant material required: 20-50 mg finely homogenized tissue 
 
## Materials and preparations
MS grade Methanol (with suitable IS mix 100 ng), MilliQ Water, with suitable internal standards mix 100 ng, HLB (30 mg) SPE columns, SPE assembly, 5% Methanol, 80% methanol 
Extraction buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 0.1%diethyldithiocarbamate)Loading bufferUse 1 ml of the extraction buffer to test the amount of 1M HCl needed for itsacidification to pH 2.7. Prepare the loading buffer by adding twice the amount of1 M HCl per milliliter of extraction buffer. (Addition of 0.5 ml sample extract to 0.5 ml loading buffer must give a pH 2.7)

Note: Keep diluents in chilled condition (0-4oC) 

## Sample preparation and metabolite extraction

1. Sample Extraction (For Indole acetate metabolites; IAA):  20 to 50 mg of tissues was mixed with 1 ml cold extraction buffer and homogenized using a Mixer Mill MM301 bead mill (Retsch GmbH (http://www.retsch.com)) at a frequency of 25 Hz for 5 min after adding 2 mm ceria-stabilized zirconium oxide beads.
2. Add 1 μg of 13C indole acetate (or other suitable internal standards) and vortex well.
3. Incubated this plant extracts at 4°C with continuous shaking (20 min) and centrifuge (15 min, 23 000 g at 4°C)
4. Transfer the supernatant to a new vial and adjust pH to 2.7 with 1 M HCl
5. SPE procedure:
    - Prepare SPE vacuum assembly with HLB (30mg) column cartridges
    - Condition SPE column with 1 mL of methanol and 1mL of water
    - Equilibrate the column with 250 μl of 5 mM HCl. (Do not let column dry)
    - Load equilibrate column with 0.5 ml loading buffer
    - Load 0.5 ml Sample onto the SPE column, and mix intensely with the loading buffer. Pass the mixture slowly through the HLB sorbent immediately
    - Wash the column with 2 ml of 5% methanol
    - Put clean glass tubes into the manifold rack, and then elute the sample from the column with 2 ml of 80% methanol.
    - Collect sample eluent and evaporate the samples to dryness in a SpeedVac concentrator or under nitrogen stream at room temperature.
6. Store samples at -80°C till further analysis or ship in dry ice.
7. Sample are reconstituted in mobile phase (or 50% methanol) before analysis

Commit message:

Fix 313 SOP sarah's notes (#470)
* Update viral-purification-from-bacterial-culture.md

added metadata table and bibliography

* Update lipid-and-fatty-acid-extraction-protocol-from-biological-samples.md

added metadata table

* Update metabolite-extraction-from-adherent-mammalian-cells.md

add metadata table

* Update metabolite-extraction-from-plant-tissue.md

add metadata table

* Update proteomics-tmt-labelled-sp3-method.md

add metadata table

docs/_Experimental-SOPs/metabolite-extraction-from-plant-tissue.md, after:

---
title: Metabolite extraction from plant tissue
category: Experimental-SOPs
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
authors:
---

## Metadata

| Title |  Category | Adapated and used by | last accessed |  Link to protocol | Primary origin for protocol | 
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |------ |
| Metabolite extraction from plant tissue | Metabolite Extraction | Denise Selegato, EMBL | 2022-09 | {% cite Novák_2016 %} | {% cite Novák_2016 %} |
{: .table .table-hover}

Protocol/MCF/SamplePrep/03: Metabolite extraction from plant tissues {% cite Novák_2016 %}

## Sample required
Plant material required: 20-50 mg finely homogenized tissue 
 
## Materials and preparations
MS grade Methanol (with suitable IS mix 100 ng), MilliQ Water, with suitable internal standards mix 100 ng, HLB (30 mg) SPE columns, SPE assembly, 5% Methanol, 80% methanol 
Extraction buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 0.1%diethyldithiocarbamate)Loading bufferUse 1 ml of the extraction buffer to test the amount of 1M HCl needed for itsacidification to pH 2.7. Prepare the loading buffer by adding twice the amount of1 M HCl per milliliter of extraction buffer. (Addition of 0.5 ml sample extract to 0.5 ml loading buffer must give a pH 2.7)

Note: Keep diluents in chilled condition (0-4oC) 

## Sample preparation and metabolite extraction

1. Sample Extraction (For Indole acetate metabolites; IAA):  20 to 50 mg of tissues was mixed with 1 ml cold extraction buffer and homogenized using a Mixer Mill MM301 bead mill (Retsch GmbH (http://www.retsch.com)) at a frequency of 25 Hz for 5 min after adding 2 mm ceria-stabilized zirconium oxide beads.
2. Add 1 μg of 13C indole acetate (or other suitable internal standards) and vortex well.
3. Incubated this plant extracts at 4°C with continuous shaking (20 min) and centrifuge (15 min, 23 000 g at 4°C)
4. Transfer the supernatant to a new vial and adjust pH to 2.7 with 1 M HCl
5. SPE procedure:
    - Prepare SPE vacuum assembly with HLB (30mg) column cartridges
    - Condition SPE column with 1 mL of methanol and 1mL of water
    - Equilibrate the column with 250 μl of 5 mM HCl. (Do not let column dry)
    - Load equilibrate column with 0.5 ml loading buffer
    - Load 0.5 ml Sample onto the SPE column, and mix intensely with the loading buffer. Pass the mixture slowly through the HLB sorbent immediately
    - Wash the column with 2 ml of 5% methanol
    - Put clean glass tubes into the manifold rack, and then elute the sample from the column with 2 ml of 80% methanol.
    - Collect sample eluent and evaporate the samples to dryness in a SpeedVac concentrator or under nitrogen stream at room temperature.
6. Store samples at -80°C till further analysis or ship in dry ice.
7. Sample are reconstituted in mobile phase (or 50% methanol) before analysis
