docs/_Experimental-SOPs/viral-purification-from-bacterial-culture.md, before:

---
title: Viral purification from bacterial culture
category: Experimental-SOPs
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
hide: true
authors:

---

## Protocol
1.Centrifuge 40 ml of bacterial culture infected with phage at 6000 g for 30 min, remove the supernatant and filter it through a 0.45 μm syringe filter

2.Centrifuge the filtrate at 35 000 g for 4 h, remove the supernatant and re-suspend the pellet in 600 μl SM buffer

3.Add 2 μl of DNAse I and 20 μl of 10x DNAse buffer and incubate at 37°C for 1.5 h

4.Incubate sample at 65°C for 30 min to inactivate DNAse I

5.Add 10  μl of 20 % SDS and 40  μl of Proteinase K (20 mg/ ml) and incubate at 37°C for 1 h

6.After the incubation, mix the sample with an equal amount of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl pH 8.0 (25:24:1) alcohol in a phase lock gel light tubes and centrifuge at 12 000 g for 5 min

7.Add 600 μl more of the phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol to the tube and centrifuge at 12 000 g for 5 min

8.Transfer the aqueous phase to a new tube and add 1200  μl cold 100% ethanol

9.Incubate sample overnight at -80°C, and then centrifuge at 16 000 g for at 4°C for 1 h

10.Remove the supernatant and re-suspend the pellet in 100  μl TE buffer

11.Store at 4°C

## Source

---

In-house protocol provided by Sarah Schulz.

Commit message:

Fix 313 SOP sarah's notes (#470)
* Update viral-purification-from-bacterial-culture.md

added metadata table and bibliography

* Update lipid-and-fatty-acid-extraction-protocol-from-biological-samples.md

added metadata table

* Update metabolite-extraction-from-adherent-mammalian-cells.md

add metadata table

* Update metabolite-extraction-from-plant-tissue.md

add metadata table

* Update proteomics-tmt-labelled-sp3-method.md

add metadata table

docs/_Experimental-SOPs/viral-purification-from-bacterial-culture.md, after:

---
title: Viral purification from bacterial culture
category: Experimental-SOPs
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
hide: true
authors:

---

## Metadata

| Title |  Category | Adapated and used by | last accessed |  Link to protocol | Primary origin for protocol | 
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |------ |
| Viral purification from bacterial culture  | Sample Preparation, Virus| EMBL, Sarah Schulz | 2021-11-09 | [protocols.io](dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.e6nvwjq7wlmk/v1) | {% cite bachrach_1971 %} |
{: .table .table-hover}

## Protocol
1.Centrifuge 40 ml of bacterial culture infected with phage at 6000 g for 30 min, remove the supernatant and filter it through a 0.45 μm syringe filter

2.Centrifuge the filtrate at 35 000 g for 4 h, remove the supernatant and re-suspend the pellet in 600 μl SM buffer

3.Add 2 μl of DNAse I and 20 μl of 10x DNAse buffer and incubate at 37°C for 1.5 h

4.Incubate sample at 65°C for 30 min to inactivate DNAse I

5.Add 10  μl of 20 % SDS and 40  μl of Proteinase K (20 mg/ ml) and incubate at 37°C for 1 h

6.After the incubation, mix the sample with an equal amount of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl pH 8.0 (25:24:1) alcohol in a phase lock gel light tubes and centrifuge at 12 000 g for 5 min

7.Add 600 μl more of the phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol to the tube and centrifuge at 12 000 g for 5 min

8.Transfer the aqueous phase to a new tube and add 1200  μl cold 100% ethanol

9.Incubate sample overnight at -80°C, and then centrifuge at 16 000 g for at 4°C for 1 h

10.Remove the supernatant and re-suspend the pellet in 100  μl TE buffer

11.Store at 4°C

## Source

---

In-house protocol provided by Sarah Schulz.
