docs/_Getting-Started/01-introduction.md, before:

---
title: The NFDI4Microbiota Knowledge Base
category: Getting-Started
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
---

<!-- <div class="bd-intro pt-2 ps-lg-2">
                <div class="d-md-flex flex-md-row-reverse align-items-center justify-content-between">
                    <div class="mb-3 mb-md-0 d-flex text-nowrap"><a class="btn btn-sm btn-bd-light rounded-2"
                            href="https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base"
                            title="View and edit this file on GitHub" target="_blank" rel="noopener">
                            View on GitHub
                        </a>
                    </div>
                    <h1 class="bd-title mb-0" id="content">Introduction</h1>
                </div>
                

</div> -->

## NFDI4Microbiota - <small class="text-muted">Democratize access to microbiota data and high-end computational analyses</small>


NFDI4Microbiota is a consortium that is part of the German NFDI (National research Data Infrastructure), aimed at advancing microbiological research through digital transformation. 

### Mission

Our mission is to be the central hub in Germany for supporting the microbiology community with access to (meta)data, analysis services, data/metadata standards, training and infrastructure. Given microbiology's relevance to medicine, agriculture, biotechnology, and earth sciences, the consortium's work strives for a broader societal impact.

### Vision

The vision of the NFDI4Microbiota consortium is that researchers in microbiology (including bacteriology, virology, protistology, mycology and parasitology) can translate research data easily into a deep understanding of microbial species and their interactions on a molecular level.

### What we aim and strive for 

We aim to foster a cultural shift towards open science and reproducible research by promoting the FAIR principles, that are, Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable research. We offer training to enhance researchers' skills and data literacy, thereby improving the overall quality of research. By integrating microbial expertise, we aim to augment the value of other NFDI consortia and strengthen connections within the national and international microbiology communities.

We strive to improve research processes by organizing and linking microbial (meta)data, supporting high-quality (meta)data management through data stewards, and enhancing (meta)data reproducibility through standardized processing and analysis. Additionally, we are developing computational tools to translate (meta)data into new insights and creating a central information hub tailored to the needs of the microbial research community.

### Where to find us

More information on how to contribute to the consortium, participate in coffee talks, become an ambasador or take part in training events, visit the [NFDI4Microbiota webpage](https://nfdi4microbiota.de/). If you have questions feel free to contact us via the [Helpdesk](https://nfdi4microbiota.de/contact-form.html) or contact us directly via [email](mailto:helpdesk@nfdi4microbiota.de). 

By sending an email you agree with the NFDI4Microbiota Consortium Privacy Policy, found bellow the Helpdesk contact form.




## What is this Knowledge Base about?

---

This knowledge base is a collection of information and references with
relevance for the microbiology community in terms of Research Data
Management, Data Analysis, FAIR principles, standards, and much
more. Furthermore, information about the NFDI4Microbiota consortium
are collected.

### How to use this resource

The available resources are shown in the left navigation. Clicking on
the link will toggle the visibility of sub-content. This resource is
published under the Creative Commons Attribution
([CC-BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)).

### How to find a resource

Use the search bar at the top of the left navigation. All the
documents have been indexed so a keyword should be sufficient in
achieving the look-up for the desired document.

### How to contribute to this resource

The files are hosted at a [repo on
GitHub](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base). You
can contribute by suggesting new content in [an
issue](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/issues)
or directly propose changes using a [pull
request](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/pulls).

Commit message:

remove contribution ambiguity by linking to one point of truth.md
fix #306 by slightly rephrasing and pointing to contributing.md file

docs/_Getting-Started/01-introduction.md, after:

---
title: The NFDI4Microbiota Knowledge Base
category: Getting-Started
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
---

<!-- <div class="bd-intro pt-2 ps-lg-2">
                <div class="d-md-flex flex-md-row-reverse align-items-center justify-content-between">
                    <div class="mb-3 mb-md-0 d-flex text-nowrap"><a class="btn btn-sm btn-bd-light rounded-2"
                            href="https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base"
                            title="View and edit this file on GitHub" target="_blank" rel="noopener">
                            View on GitHub
                        </a>
                    </div>
                    <h1 class="bd-title mb-0" id="content">Introduction</h1>
                </div>
                

</div> -->

## NFDI4Microbiota - <small class="text-muted">Democratize access to microbiota data and high-end computational analyses</small>


NFDI4Microbiota is a consortium that is part of the German NFDI (National research Data Infrastructure), aimed at advancing microbiological research through digital transformation. 

### Mission

Our mission is to be the central hub in Germany for supporting the microbiology community with access to (meta)data, analysis services, data/metadata standards, training and infrastructure. Given microbiology's relevance to medicine, agriculture, biotechnology, and earth sciences, the consortium's work strives for a broader societal impact.

### Vision

The vision of the NFDI4Microbiota consortium is that researchers in microbiology (including bacteriology, virology, protistology, mycology and parasitology) can translate research data easily into a deep understanding of microbial species and their interactions on a molecular level.

### What we aim and strive for 

We aim to foster a cultural shift towards open science and reproducible research by promoting the FAIR principles, that are, Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable research. We offer training to enhance researchers' skills and data literacy, thereby improving the overall quality of research. By integrating microbial expertise, we aim to augment the value of other NFDI consortia and strengthen connections within the national and international microbiology communities.

We strive to improve research processes by organizing and linking microbial (meta)data, supporting high-quality (meta)data management through data stewards, and enhancing (meta)data reproducibility through standardized processing and analysis. Additionally, we are developing computational tools to translate (meta)data into new insights and creating a central information hub tailored to the needs of the microbial research community.

### Where to find us

More information on how to contribute to the consortium, participate in coffee talks, become an ambasador or take part in training events, visit the [NFDI4Microbiota webpage](https://nfdi4microbiota.de/). If you have questions feel free to contact us via the [Helpdesk](https://nfdi4microbiota.de/contact-form.html) or contact us directly via [email](mailto:helpdesk@nfdi4microbiota.de). 

By sending an email you agree with the NFDI4Microbiota Consortium Privacy Policy, found bellow the Helpdesk contact form.




## What is this Knowledge Base about?

---

This knowledge base is a collection of information and references with
relevance for the microbiology community in terms of Research Data
Management, Data Analysis, FAIR principles, standards, and much
more. Furthermore, information about the NFDI4Microbiota consortium
are collected.

### How to use this resource

The available resources are shown in the left navigation. Clicking on
the link will toggle the visibility of sub-content. This resource is
published under the Creative Commons Attribution
([CC-BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)).

### How to find a resource

Use the search bar at the top of the left navigation. All the
documents have been indexed so a keyword should be sufficient in
achieving the look-up for the desired document.

### How to contribute to this resource

The files are hosted at a [repo on
GitHub](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base).
You can contribute by suggesting new content by [opening an issue](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/issues) or by following [our contribution guidelines](/Getting-Started/contributing.md) to propose changes directly!
