docs/_Getting-Started/contributing.md, before:

---
title: How to Contribute
category: Getting-Started
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
---
 
## Introduction

This page contains instructions on how to contribute to the Knowledge Base and is intended for contributors with no prior GitHub experience. Feel free to skip to the appropriate section if you feel like you are an experienced user.

The main steps a user must follow to contribute to the Knowledge Base are:

1. Create a GitHub account
2. Make changes to files in the repository:
    - Edit existing files *or*
    - Create new files
3. Add your name to the [03-contributors.md](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/main/docs/_Getting-Started/contributors.md) file

## Create a GitHub Account

---

Users will need a GitHub account if they wish to contribute to the Knowledge Base. If you do not already have an account, go to the GitHub [homepage](https://github.com/) and click the `Sign Up` button to create one. Then follow the instructions. Once you have created an account, and signed in, go to the [Knowledge Base repository](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base.github.io)


## Make Changes to the Repository

---

### Edit Existing Files

In order to make changes to the repository, users must edit Markdown files in the GitHub editor. If you have never used Markdown files before, [here](https://www.markdowntutorial.com/) is a link to a Markdown tutorial. If you just need to look up syntax, follow this [link](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/).

*Note: Markdown files are files which end with the `.md` suffix, for example this `contributing.md` file. Please do not try to edit non Markdown files.*

To edit an existing file:

1. Navigate to the file you want to edit in the repository and click on it
2. Click on the pen icon on the top right to begin editing
3. After editing the file, add a commit name that includes the name of the edited file and the [issue number](#github-issues) (if available) e.g. `#32 fixed typo in RDM page`
4. Select the `Create new branch` option and add a branch name which includes the name of the edited file and the [issue number](#github-issues) (if available)
5. Press the `Propose changes` button
6. Write a comment briefly describing the changes you have made
   1. If you are working on a page related to Research Data Management (RDM), assign @jvddorpe (Justine Vandendorpe) as a reviewer
   2. If you are working on a page related to Workflows, assign @KK-NFDI (Kassian Kobert) as a reviewer
7. Assign the pull request to `Mahdi Robbani` or  `Natalie Kurtys`
8. Press the `Create pull request` button

[Here](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files) is a guide to editing files on GitHub if you need further help.

*Note: All files should be edited according to the [style guide](#markdown-style-guide).*

*Note: Learn more about [linking pull request and closing issues automatically](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/using-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue).*

### Create New Files

If you want to create a new page on the website, create a new GitHub issue. A [GitHub issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/about-issues) is a way to keep track of changes we want to make to the repository. Anyone can create an issue if they think a new page should be created or if they desire any changes to a page. These can be seen in the `Issues` tab at the top of the GitHub repository. All issues have an associated issue number e.g. #32 and if this number is used in commit messages, those changes then appear in the issue, making it easier to see what changes a page has undergone.

To create a new issue:

1. Go to the [issues page](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base.github.io/issues)
2. Click the `New issue` button
3. Add the title (the name of the suggested page) and add a description of what you want to include in the new page
4. Assign the issue to `Mahdi Robbani`
5. Click the `Submit new issue` button
6. Your request will be reviewed and discussed among the git-committee-members of NFDI4Microbiota.
7. When accepted, a new page/ new file will be created and added to the appropriate collection.
8. The collection may be reordered in [this config.yaml file](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/9132ef3bfc9f28fcf8eb293d93fc4507eec87a9d/_config.yml#L48) as described below. 

[Here](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/creating-an-issue) is a guide on creating issues on GitHub if you need further help.

*Note: Currently all microbiology related files and pages are collected in the [Resources Collection]( _Resources) until a more suitable Collection is created for these.*


## Cite Sources

---

1. Websites can be linked in the text (e.g. [NFDI4Microbiota](https://nfdi4microbiota.de/)).
2. Journal articles can be referenced at the bottom of the page, as in a regular scientific journal. In order to reference an article:
   1. Add the reference to the `docs/_bibliography/references.bib` file in Bibtex format
   2. Cite the reference in the text using `{% raw %}{% cite <reference_name> %}{% endraw %}`



## Contribution Rules

---

When adding or editing files, please observe the following rules:

1. Use respectful and inclusive language
2. Use American English
3. Keep the content factual
4. Cite sources appropriately (see below)
5. Use `##` for the main file heading and use `###`, `####`, …, for all subheadings
6. Capitalize your headings
7. After the second and every following `##` add `---` for a visual break line.
8. Place image files in the `assets/img/` directory
9. Use internal links to Markdown documents with {% raw %}`[Link text]({% link _RDM-Share/26_licenses.md %})`{% endraw %}
10. Non-public links are restricted to the how-we-operate section and manually whitelisted in `.github/workflows/ignored-urls.txt`
11. Write "Knowledge Base" in capital letters
12. Be consistent with adding periods or not at the end of list items
13. Please correct valid typos flagged by the spell checker bot.

*Note: we might edit your contribution to homogenize the writing style.*


## Final step: Add Your Name to the CONTRIBUTORS File

---

We appreciate your contribution! Please add your name to the [03-contributors.md](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/main/docs/_Getting-Started/contributors.md) file.

      

## Special Case: Reordering Document Pages in the Collection Headers

---

You can suggest to reorder the pages within a collection if needed or even reassign them to different collections, if another topic seems more suitable. Please have a look at how the pages and collections are currently ordered in [this config.yaml file](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/9132ef3bfc9f28fcf8eb293d93fc4507eec87a9d/_config.yml#L48).
The view corresponds to the left-hand navigation bar on topics featured on the Knowledge Base.
1. Make a reordering suggestion in the file.
2. Follow the instructions under `### Edit Existing Files`
3. Must-have for the commit message and merge requests:
   1. meaningful commit header and **detailed** description 
   2. Add content reviewers, assign @jvddorpe (Justine Vandendorpe) as a reviewer
4. Your suggestions will be discussed internally before potential acceptance.

Commit message:

add contributors to contributing file

docs/_Getting-Started/contributing.md, after:

---
title: How to Contribute
category: Getting-Started
layout: default
docs_css: markdown
authors:
   - jvandendorpe
   - nkurtys
   - mrobbani
---
 
## Introduction

This page contains instructions on how to contribute to the Knowledge Base and is intended for contributors with no prior GitHub experience. Feel free to skip to the appropriate section if you feel like you are an experienced user.

The main steps a user must follow to contribute to the Knowledge Base are:

1. Create a GitHub account
2. Make changes to files in the repository:
    - Edit existing files *or*
    - Create new files
3. Add your name to the [03-contributors.md](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/main/docs/_Getting-Started/contributors.md) file

## Create a GitHub Account

---

Users will need a GitHub account if they wish to contribute to the Knowledge Base. If you do not already have an account, go to the GitHub [homepage](https://github.com/) and click the `Sign Up` button to create one. Then follow the instructions. Once you have created an account, and signed in, go to the [Knowledge Base repository](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base.github.io)


## Make Changes to the Repository

---

### Edit Existing Files

In order to make changes to the repository, users must edit Markdown files in the GitHub editor. If you have never used Markdown files before, [here](https://www.markdowntutorial.com/) is a link to a Markdown tutorial. If you just need to look up syntax, follow this [link](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/).

*Note: Markdown files are files which end with the `.md` suffix, for example this `contributing.md` file. Please do not try to edit non Markdown files.*

To edit an existing file:

1. Navigate to the file you want to edit in the repository and click on it
2. Click on the pen icon on the top right to begin editing
3. After editing the file, add a commit name that includes the name of the edited file and the [issue number](#github-issues) (if available) e.g. `#32 fixed typo in RDM page`
4. Select the `Create new branch` option and add a branch name which includes the name of the edited file and the [issue number](#github-issues) (if available)
5. Press the `Propose changes` button
6. Write a comment briefly describing the changes you have made
   1. If you are working on a page related to Research Data Management (RDM), assign @jvddorpe (Justine Vandendorpe) as a reviewer
   2. If you are working on a page related to Workflows, assign @KK-NFDI (Kassian Kobert) as a reviewer
7. Assign the pull request to `Mahdi Robbani` or  `Natalie Kurtys`
8. Press the `Create pull request` button

[Here](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files) is a guide to editing files on GitHub if you need further help.

*Note: All files should be edited according to the [style guide](#markdown-style-guide).*

*Note: Learn more about [linking pull request and closing issues automatically](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/using-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue).*

### Create New Files

If you want to create a new page on the website, create a new GitHub issue. A [GitHub issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/about-issues) is a way to keep track of changes we want to make to the repository. Anyone can create an issue if they think a new page should be created or if they desire any changes to a page. These can be seen in the `Issues` tab at the top of the GitHub repository. All issues have an associated issue number e.g. #32 and if this number is used in commit messages, those changes then appear in the issue, making it easier to see what changes a page has undergone.

To create a new issue:

1. Go to the [issues page](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base.github.io/issues)
2. Click the `New issue` button
3. Add the title (the name of the suggested page) and add a description of what you want to include in the new page
4. Assign the issue to `Mahdi Robbani` or `Natalie Kurtys`
5. Click the `Submit new issue` button
6. Your request will be reviewed and discussed among the git-committee-members of NFDI4Microbiota.
7. When accepted, a new page/ new file will be created and added to the appropriate collection.
8. The collection may be reordered in [this config.yaml file](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/9132ef3bfc9f28fcf8eb293d93fc4507eec87a9d/_config.yml#L48) as described below. 

[Here](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/creating-an-issue) is a guide on creating issues on GitHub if you need further help.

*Note: Currently all microbiology related files and pages are collected in the [Resources Collection]( _Resources) until a more suitable Collection is created for these.*


## Cite Sources

---

1. Websites can be linked in the text (e.g. [NFDI4Microbiota](https://nfdi4microbiota.de/)).
2. Journal articles can be referenced at the bottom of the page, as in a regular scientific journal. In order to reference an article:
   1. Add the reference to the `docs/_bibliography/references.bib` file in Bibtex format
   2. Cite the reference in the text using `{% raw %}{% cite <reference_name> %}{% endraw %}`



## Contribution Rules

---

When adding or editing files, please observe the following rules:

1. Use respectful and inclusive language
2. Use American English
3. Keep the content factual
4. Cite sources appropriately (see below)
5. Use `##` for the main file heading and use `###`, `####`, …, for all subheadings
6. Capitalize your headings
7. After the second and every following `##` add `---` for a visual break line.
8. Place image files in the `assets/img/` directory
9. Use internal links to Markdown documents with {% raw %}`[Link text]({% link _RDM-Share/26_licenses.md %})`{% endraw %}
10. Non-public links are restricted to the how-we-operate section and manually whitelisted in `.github/workflows/ignored-urls.txt`
11. Write "Knowledge Base" in capital letters
12. Be consistent with adding periods or not at the end of list items
13. Please correct valid typos flagged by the spell checker bot.

*Note: we might edit your contribution to homogenize the writing style.*


## Final step: Add Your Name to the CONTRIBUTORS File

---

We appreciate your contribution! Please add your name to the [03-contributors.md](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/main/docs/_Getting-Started/contributors.md) file.

      

## Special Case: Reordering Document Pages in the Collection Headers

---

You can suggest to reorder the pages within a collection if needed or even reassign them to different collections, if another topic seems more suitable. Please have a look at how the pages and collections are currently ordered in [this config.yaml file](https://github.com/NFDI4Microbiota/nfdi4microbiota-knowledge-base/blob/9132ef3bfc9f28fcf8eb293d93fc4507eec87a9d/_config.yml#L48).
The view corresponds to the left-hand navigation bar on topics featured on the Knowledge Base.
1. Make a reordering suggestion in the file.
2. Follow the instructions under `### Edit Existing Files`
3. Must-have for the commit message and merge requests:
   1. meaningful commit header and **detailed** description 
   2. Add content reviewers, assign @jvddorpe (Justine Vandendorpe) as a reviewer
4. Your suggestions will be discussed internally before potential acceptance.


## Contributors

{% include popover.html %}
